We departed JFK Airport
on the evening of April 22
and arrived in Warsaw, Poland,
the next day.
Though parts of Warsaw date back
to the medieval period
in the 13th and 14th centuries,
it is very much a modern city.
Shiny, new skyscrapers have mushroomed.
As in every large city,
Warsaw’s inhabitants have to deal
with heavy traffic and noise.
So how refreshing it was
to arrive at the branch office
located in a small village
a few miles southwest of Warsaw!
It is an attractive complex of buildings
with a beautifully designed courtyard.
It was a pleasure to meet the 148 members
of the Bethel family in their departments
—such as the Laundry Department,
the sign-language department,
and the Broadcasting Department.
The Translation Department
has been very busy
translating in three new languages
—Kashubian, Silesian, and Romany.
They produced the video Why Study the Bible?
in these local languages.
It was thrilling to see people
watching the video in their mother tongue
with tears in their eyes.
In March 2016,
publishers in a small town preached
among the community of Roma people,
inviting them to the Memorial.
Twenty-four of them came,
or every fourth person in the town.
The talk given in Romany was transmitted
from a congregation in London.
They were touched.
One young Roma man told the brothers:
“This has reached my heart.
I would like to become God’s servant,
to be God’s child.”
Though a large percentage
of the Bethel family is young in years,
the old-timers are treasured
for their very rich history
of faithfulness under trial.
Here are two widows, from left to right,
Zofia Scheider and Aniela Adach.
They were able to assist Alice
to identify brothers and sisters
in a photo of the Bethel family
taken in 1992.
Both sisters’ husbands
had taken the lead
in the Polish field
for many decades while under ban.
Sister Adach herself
was imprisoned three times.
How did she keep herself strong
during those difficult times?
She persistently prayed, and when she
was permitted to go to the library,
she eagerly read the Bible there
and would even memorize whole chapters.
You could not help but be inspired
by these loyal, humble sisters
whose faith conquered the world.
On Saturday, April 30,
we traveled to the Warsaw Assembly Hall
for the special meeting.
Practically the whole country
was tied in by streaming via the Internet.
The total attendance was 118,725.
Has the newer generation
of Witnesses in Poland
fully entered the ‘door of activity’
opened to them in May 1989
when Witnesses were legally recognized?
The Branch Committee confirmed that in 1989
there were 91,000 Kingdom publishers.
Today, there are over 122,000.
There is good potential for further growth,
since 191,524
attended the last Memorial.
Also, many young ones are being taught
to love Jehovah by their God-fearing parents.
Young ones
are mustering up boldness to witness,
as this experience illustrates.
Natalie, a regular pioneer,
studies the Bible with a woman
who has an 11-year-old daughter, Michelle.
At school, Michelle was assigned to prepare
a presentation on a religion of her choice.
Well, her mother and father
grew up in families of Witnesses
but never progressed to baptism.
Still, Michelle felt this was her religion.
She prepared slides
and videos from our website.
Michelle’s teacher was so impressed
that she arranged for Natalie
to come to further explain things.
Natalie conducted
a question-and-answer session
based on the Awake! article
in the first issue of 2016,
entitled “What Do You Know
About Jehovah’s Witnesses?”
After the presentation,
all were invited to come
to the Kingdom Hall for a guided tour.
Twenty children and two teachers
came to the Kingdom Hall.
They were shown all its features.
They saw the video
What Happens at a Kingdom Hall?
The children were allowed to use
the microphones to see
what it’s like to give a comment.
Since they had also visited
a mosque and a church,
they were asked
what differences they noticed
between those places and the Kingdom Hall.
Their personal comments were very touching,
including one boy who stated,
“You’re so open to others.”
At the end, much literature was placed.
Eleven-year-old Michelle
was very proud and happy.
Some students told her
that her religion is “really cool.”
It was time to say goodbye
to the Poland Bethel family.
Our next stop was Lviv, Ukraine.
Lviv is considered
Ukraine’s most cultural and elegant city.
Being more than 750 years old,
it has a lot of history behind it.
Just three miles north of Lviv,
in the midst of a picturesque pine forest,
is the lovely Ukraine branch office.
The beautiful grounds are well maintained
by commuters and Bethelites.
We knew we were in for a wonderful visit
by the warm welcome
that we received on our arrival.
The Branch Committee is thrilled to see
how Jehovah has blessed
the work in this country.
In 1991,
we were officially registered in Ukraine.
The door had swung wide open
for the preaching work.
At that time,
there were about 25,000 publishers.
Have the brothers vigorously entered
that ‘door of activity’ since that year?
They surely have.
Today, there are 141,000 publishers.
The 2016 Memorial attendance
was over 242,000.
Here you see the happy missionaries.
They have reason to be joyful,
considering the fertile territory
in which they work.
At the special meeting
that originated in the Bethel auditorium,
Brother Calisto gave a report
on the activity of the branch.
Especially noteworthy
were his comments about eastern Ukraine.
You likely remember that in 2014,
a conflict broke out in this region.
A cease-fire was declared in 2015,
but there is still
much civil unrest and tension.
How have the almost
10,000 publishers in this region fared?
Brother Calisto interviewed
one of the six courageous circuit overseers
who serve in eastern Ukraine,
Brother Ivan Nebera,
and his equally courageous wife, Anna.
Brother Nebera informed us
that for the first time
in two and a half years,
they were able to hold
a meeting with the pioneers.
Look at those happy faces!
Even though some of our dear brothers
must travel long distances
to meet at their Kingdom Hall,
they do so to keep themselves built up.
For example,
during Brother Nebera’s visit,
this 91-year-old sister,
though living far from the Kingdom Hall,
was present
at all the morning groups for service
and then would go out again
in the afternoons.
Her faithfulness
is a blessing to the brothers.
Many brothers live in areas
where there is much devastation.
Ruined buildings and fences
riddled with bullet holes
remind them
of the presence of the military.
Preaching from house to house has resumed,
and in some areas,
public witnessing is possible.
Well, we were all encouraged by this report.
The special meeting talks
were translated simultaneously
into five languages
and were transmitted
to all the congregations
—including those in eastern Ukraine.
We were pleased to hear
that the final attendance figure
for the special meeting
was 144,944.
The spirit of the Ukraine Bethel family
is outstanding!
There are many young ones,
some relatively new in the truth
and others whose family members
were exiled to Siberia
during Stalin’s time.
The special meal
with the family included a chorus
and traditional Ukrainian folk dancing.
It was a happy time for all.
So the day arrived for us to leave.
It was hard to leave these dear friends.